docs/overview.rst, before:

Overview
========

Start here for all things ``distlib``.

Distlib evolved out of ``packaging``
------------------------------------

Distlib is a library which implements low-level functions which relate to
packaging and distribution of Python software. It consists in part of some of
the functions in the ``packaging`` Python package, which was intended to be
released as part of Python 3.3, but which was removed shortly before Python
3.3 entered beta testing.

What was the problem with ``packaging``?
----------------------------------------

The ``packaging`` software just wasn't ready for inclusion in the Python
standard library. The amount of work needed to get it into the desired
state was too great, given the number of people able to work on the project,
the time they could devote to it and the Python 3.3 release schedule.

The approach taken by ``packaging`` was seen to be a good one: to ensure
interoperability and consistency between different tools in the packaging
space by defining standards for data formats through PEPs, and to do away
with the *ad hoc* nature of installation encouraged by the ``distutils``
approach of using executable Python code in ``setup.py``. Where custom
code was needed, it could be provided in a standardised way using
installation hooks.

While some very good work was done in defining PEPs to codify some of the
best practices, ``packaging`` suffered from some drawbacks, too:

* Not all the PEPs may have been complete, because some important use
  cases were not considered -- for example, built (binary) distributions for
  Windows.

* It continued the command-based design of ``distutils``, which had resulted
  in ``distutils`` being difficult to extend in a consistent and easily
  understood, maintainable fashion.

* Some important features required by distribution authors were not considered
  -- for example:

  * Access to data files stored in Python packages.
  * Support for plug-in extension points.
  * Support for native script execution on Windows.

  These features are supported by third-party tools (like ``setuptools`` /
  ``Distribute``) using ``pkg_resources``, *entry points* and *console
  scripts*.

* There were a lot of rough edges in the ``packaging`` implementation, both
  in terms of bugs and in terms of incompletely implemented features. This
  can be seen (with the benefit of hindsight) as due to the goals being set too
  ambitiously; the project developers bit off more than they could chew.

How Distlib can help
--------------------

The idea behind Distlib is expressed in `this python-dev post
<http://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2012-September/121716.html>`_,
though a different name was suggested for the library. Basically, Distlib
contains the implementations of the packaging PEPs and other low-level
features which relate to packaging, distribution and deployment of Python
software. If Distlib can be made genuinely useful, then it is possible for
third-party packaging tools to transition to using it. Their developers and
users then benefit from standardised implementation of low-level functions,
time saved by not having to reinvent wheels, and improved interoperability
between tools.

How you can help
----------------

If you have some time abd the inclination to improve the state of Python
packaging, then you can help by trying out Distlib, raising issues where
you find problems, contributing feedback and/or patches to the
implementation, documentation and underlying PEPs.

Main features
-------------

Distlib currently offers the following features:

* The package ``distlib.version``, which implements version specifiers as
  defined by :pep:`386`.
* The package ``distlib.metadata``, which implements distribution metadata as
  defined by :pep:`345`, :pep:`314` and :pep:`241`.
* The package ``distlib.markers``, which implements environment markers as
  defined by :pep:`345`.
* The package ``distlib.database``, which implements a database of installed
  distributions, as defined by :pep:`376`.
* The package ``distlib.depgraph``, which implements distribution dependency
  graph logic.
* The package ``distlib.glob``, which implements globbing functionality
  such as the ability to use ``**`` in patterns to specify recursing into
  subdirectories.
* The package ``distlib.resources``, which allows access to data files stored
  in Python packages, both in the file system and in .zip files.

Python version and platform compatibility
-----------------------------------------

Distlib is intended to be used on any Python version >= 2.6 and is tested on
Python versions 2.6, 2.7, 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 on Linux, Windows, and Mac OS X (not
all versions are tested on all platforms, but are expected to work correctly).


Project status
--------------

The project has reached alpha status in its development: there is a test
suite and it has been exercised on Windows, Ubuntu and Mac OS X.

The source repository for the project is on BitBucket:

https://bitbucket.org/vinay.sajip/distlib/

You can leave feedback by raising a new issue on the `issue
tracker <https://bitbucket.org/vinay.sajip/distlib/issues/new>`_
(BitBucket registration not necessary, but recommended).

Next steps
----------

You might find it helpful to look at the :ref:`tutorial`, or the
:ref:`reference`.

Commit message:

Updated documentation to include scripts functionality.

docs/overview.rst, after:

Overview
========

Start here for all things ``distlib``.

Distlib evolved out of ``packaging``
------------------------------------

Distlib is a library which implements low-level functions which relate to
packaging and distribution of Python software. It consists in part of some of
the functions in the ``packaging`` Python package, which was intended to be
released as part of Python 3.3, but which was removed shortly before Python
3.3 entered beta testing.

What was the problem with ``packaging``?
----------------------------------------

The ``packaging`` software just wasn't ready for inclusion in the Python
standard library. The amount of work needed to get it into the desired
state was too great, given the number of people able to work on the project,
the time they could devote to it and the Python 3.3 release schedule.

The approach taken by ``packaging`` was seen to be a good one: to ensure
interoperability and consistency between different tools in the packaging
space by defining standards for data formats through PEPs, and to do away
with the *ad hoc* nature of installation encouraged by the ``distutils``
approach of using executable Python code in ``setup.py``. Where custom
code was needed, it could be provided in a standardised way using
installation hooks.

While some very good work was done in defining PEPs to codify some of the
best practices, ``packaging`` suffered from some drawbacks, too:

* Not all the PEPs may have been complete, because some important use
  cases were not considered -- for example, built (binary) distributions for
  Windows.

* It continued the command-based design of ``distutils``, which had resulted
  in ``distutils`` being difficult to extend in a consistent and easily
  understood, maintainable fashion.

* Some important features required by distribution authors were not considered
  -- for example:

  * Access to data files stored in Python packages.
  * Support for plug-in extension points.
  * Support for native script execution on Windows.

  These features are supported by third-party tools (like ``setuptools`` /
  ``Distribute``) using ``pkg_resources``, *entry points* and *console
  scripts*.

* There were a lot of rough edges in the ``packaging`` implementation, both
  in terms of bugs and in terms of incompletely implemented features. This
  can be seen (with the benefit of hindsight) as due to the goals being set too
  ambitiously; the project developers bit off more than they could chew.

How Distlib can help
--------------------

The idea behind Distlib is expressed in `this python-dev post
<http://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2012-September/121716.html>`_,
though a different name was suggested for the library. Basically, Distlib
contains the implementations of the packaging PEPs and other low-level
features which relate to packaging, distribution and deployment of Python
software. If Distlib can be made genuinely useful, then it is possible for
third-party packaging tools to transition to using it. Their developers and
users then benefit from standardised implementation of low-level functions,
time saved by not having to reinvent wheels, and improved interoperability
between tools.

How you can help
----------------

If you have some time abd the inclination to improve the state of Python
packaging, then you can help by trying out Distlib, raising issues where
you find problems, contributing feedback and/or patches to the
implementation, documentation and underlying PEPs.

Main features
-------------

Distlib currently offers the following features:

* The package ``distlib.version``, which implements version specifiers as
  defined by :pep:`386`.
* The package ``distlib.metadata``, which implements distribution metadata as
  defined by :pep:`345`, :pep:`314` and :pep:`241`.
* The package ``distlib.markers``, which implements environment markers as
  defined by :pep:`345`.
* The package ``distlib.database``, which implements a database of installed
  distributions, as defined by :pep:`376`.
* The package ``distlib.depgraph``, which implements distribution dependency
  graph logic.
* The package ``distlib.glob``, which implements globbing functionality
  such as the ability to use ``**`` in patterns to specify recursing into
  subdirectories.
* The package ``distlib.resources``, which allows access to data files stored
  in Python packages, both in the file system and in .zip files.
* The package ``distlib.scripts``, which allows installing of scripts with
  adjustment of shebang lines and support for native Windows executable
  launchers.

Python version and platform compatibility
-----------------------------------------

Distlib is intended to be used on any Python version >= 2.6 and is tested on
Python versions 2.6, 2.7, 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 on Linux, Windows, and Mac OS X (not
all versions are tested on all platforms, but are expected to work correctly).


Project status
--------------

The project has reached alpha status in its development: there is a test
suite and it has been exercised on Windows, Ubuntu and Mac OS X.

The source repository for the project is on BitBucket:

https://bitbucket.org/vinay.sajip/distlib/

You can leave feedback by raising a new issue on the `issue
tracker <https://bitbucket.org/vinay.sajip/distlib/issues/new>`_
(BitBucket registration not necessary, but recommended).

Next steps
----------

You might find it helpful to look at the :ref:`tutorial`, or the
:ref:`reference`.
